# shift-networking-toolkit
A collection of scripts designed to aide in data gather and analysis of OpenShift 4 Cluster traffic and routing.

It is always best to open a support case to discuss with an engineer about the findings from your own cluster, and these scripts should be considered supplemental to an analysis in partnership with Red Hat. However, they are available for an initial look at your systems performance, and may be recommended as part of data-gathering efforts to streamline debugging and deeper understanding on haproxy handling for your openshift cluster. 

This repository and all included scripts are debugging tools provided without warranty. They offer no support from Red Hat or any other official source. Please use at your own risk.

# haproxy-gather.sh
Can be used to gather a summary output of all router-pods statistics from your cluster at once along with haproxy.config for help in understanding more about how your cluster is routing traffic to it's backend pods.

Usage: `./haproxy-gather.sh`

Note that router pod hit statistics being gathered are subject to intermittent log clears, and so repeated gathers may be necessary to get a fully comprehensive view of activity. Stats are not persistent even through the lifespan of a container and are cleared frequently; They are reset to 0 every time haproxy.config reloads. You may find that this occurs very often in a cluster with a lot of churn/new pods/deployments - 5s. Or longer if deployments are static and routes aren't changing you may get a much larger sample size. You may need to run the haproxy-gather.sh script a few times to get a solid sample depending on your cluster configuration/time between test calls and gather run. 

Usage on 3.11 versus 4.x:
Set the values in the script to run on 3.11 or 4.x clusters (4.x set as default)
~~~
namespace="openshift-ingress" #If running on 3.11='default', 4.x='openshift-ingress'
selector="default" #If running on 3.11='router' #4.x='default'
~~~

See https://access.redhat.com/solutions/6987555 for more information on how to analyze contents pulled by haproxy-gather, and refer to the documentation at https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.11/networking/routes/route-configuration.html#nw-route-specific-annotations_route-configuration for more on how to streamline and optimize your routes. This script is designed primarily to aggregate data for easier troubleshooting efforts. 

# Analyze_stats.sh
This is a fast-analysis script that will grab the lbtot hit counter for your desired route query, the http response codes for each backend, the annotations recorded by haproxy.config for confirming load-balance type and similar, and will also compile a summary table for all pods associated with the route for analysis. Run this script inside the resulting `haproxy-gather/` folder generated by `haproxy-gather.sh` , specifying the haproxy.config file you are examining and route you wish to examine, for example `default_haproxy.config` and `mytestroute`).

# Haproxy_backend_summary.sh
A simple count check on how many back-ends are in use per haproxy.config (and therefore, sharded instance of your router deployments); good for validating total expected load on the pods, and may also provide insight into how much work these pods are doing if observing that there is latency during haproxy.config refresh or otherwise. 

# Curl_loop_until_error.sh
A basic script to run a curl against a target address with logging parameter options. Designed to catch an unexpected response like a 502 error.
usage: curl_loop_until_error.sh `<url>` (can also modify the script directly to include additional parameters like payloads/POST type instead of GET). Helpful when we need to catch a rare occurrance and can't watch for explicit timeframes.

# IPUtils-Container
A simple UBI dockerfile and companion pod.yaml that deploy a test suite pod to enable curl tests and other network config requests to replicate and troubleshoot problems on OpenShift

# network-sos.sh
A network-targeted data-dump pull that replicates the network plugin from sos for specific use-cases where sos-report cannot or will not complete network pulls on an impacted host. Must be run as root on the target node (chroot /host), and not from toolbox as it isn't escaping it's chroot state the way sos would inside a container. Tries to pull similar `sos_commands/networking/*` output for referencing directly with a time-stamped tarball creation.

# digloop.sh
A script to dig a target domain periodically until we encounter an unexpected result (no IPV4 returned) and then fire a trace to log the errant result.
Usage: `./digloop.sh <FQDN>`
Set `VERBOSE=false` to have a quieter report run

# keepalived_check.sh
A keepalived toolkit to quick-validate VIP placement, scrape details on live clusters and perform health checks. 
See more here: https://access.redhat.com/articles/7137655
Usage: `./keepalive_check.sh <option>`

~~~
Usage and arguments overview - review documentation for more details
all commands can be run separately for simplified reporting, --full flag is best for diagnostics and support
-h|--help) - print brief help details
--full) - Run comprehensive analysis report (all tooling - uses debug shell)
--basic) - run basic report (log gather, failover history and current vip placement overview)
--vrrp) - run a brief 5s tcpdump on all nodes for VRRP (uses debug shell)
--validate) - run curl validation to confirm throughput of VIP and routers (ingress check)
--logs) - pull pod logs from keepalived project namespace for review
--configs) - pull keepalived configs from nodes for review (uses debug shell)
--must-gather) - run report on static must-gather loaded with omc (omc use <mustgather>)
~~~

# tcpanalyze
A brief Pcap reader tool for fast summary output before deep dive. Runs in the local directory and reviews any files of type `*.pcap*` for a summary recap of packet flow and IPs.

# network-sos.sh
supplemental manual pull for sosreport for networking/ss/ethtool capture on target host
largely attempting to replicate sos's network.py script for one-off gathers where the sosreport stalls before tagging network rules.
Run as root on host node (not from within toolbox container)

# DHCP-to-static.sh
This script will suggest an nmcli string to set up static interfacing based on existing DHCP rules
It is designed to aide in testing and caution should be used whenever possible. Not for use in production environments.
does not actually execute any changes - just prints suggested config options. Written for OpenShift clusters using OVNkubernetes and will be aimed at 
`br-ex` interface as the `primary` link.

Example output:
~~~
sh-5.1# ./DHCP-to-static.sh 
7: br-ex: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    inet 10.0.0.192/21 brd 10.0.215.255 scope global dynamic noprefixroute br-ex
    inet 169.254.0.2/17 brd 169.254.127.255 scope global br-ex
suggested command to set up static interfacing (not executed, echoed only for review):
-----
#nmcli con add con-name eth0 type ethernet ifname eth0 ipv4.method manual ipv4.address 10.0.0.192/21 ipv4.gateway 10.0.0.254 ipv4.dns 10.0.0.26,10.0.0.25, ipv4.dns-search test-lab.cluster.domain.com,additional-search-1,additional-search-2,
-----
NOTE: Cluster domain search string: test-lab.cluster.domain.com should be automatically appended by the platform and may not need to be included in the above dns-search string.
Do not apply this command unless you validate the result yourself first, applying invalid network configurations can result in a degraded cluster node state
~~~

# cross-talk-check.sh
Assists with debugging network flow issues between nodes - validates that pods are able to communicate across nodes in the cluster and confirm CNI is healthy.